 # Store

The Store is the heart of the library and is responsible for managing the state of all Features that are added to the map. The Store is created when Terra Draw is instantiated, but is not directly exposed, and instead exposed via a series of API methods on the Terra Draw instance itself. All data in the store is represented using [GeoJSON](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GeoJSON). Currently the store only represents data as Features, using the Point, LineString and Polygon geometry types.


### Ids

By default Terra Draw will use [UUID4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_identifier#Version_4_(random)) to create Feature ids. This is done because this ids are broadly unique and as such lends themselves well to these IDs where would want our features to be uniquely identifiable, potentially across drawing sessions.
 
It is possible to override this with an approach which aligns with your own requirements. This is done via the `idStrategy`` paramter is passed at the top level when you create a Terra Draw instance. For example say we wanted to be able to define our own integer incrementing id strategy, we could do that like so:

```typescript

const draw = new TerraDraw({
  adapter,
  modes,
  idStrategy: {
    isValidId: (id) => typeof id === "number" && Number.isInteger(id),
    getId: (function () {
      let id = 0;
      return function () {
        return ++id;
      };
    })() // Returns a function that returns incrementing integer ids
  },
});
```

You can create any strategy you like, although it advisable to start with one and stick with it consistently.

> [!IMPORTANT]
> You can only have one unique id per feature in each Terra Draw instance. Trying to create or add a feature with an id that already exists will throw an error!

It is also possible to check if a given feature with an id exists if so needed:

```typescript
  draw.hasFeature('f8e5a38d-ecfa-4294-8461-d9cff0e0d7f8')
```

### Retrieving Data

The data contained with the store is exposed via the `getSnapshot` method, which returns an Array of all given Feature geometries in the Store:

```javascript
// Get an Array of all Features in the Store
const features = draw.getSnapshot();
```

We can then filter through this array to get the features we're looking for, as an example only returning `TerraDrawPolygonMode` features:

```javascript
features.filter((feature) => feature.properties.mode === 'polygon')
```

### Adding Data

Features are added to the Store when interacting with the Map using a number of available drawing Modes (such as `TerraDrawRectangleMode` or `TerraDrawPolygonMode`).

> [!TIP]
> The `getSnapshot` method returns a deep copy of the Store, so you can safely mutate the returned Array without affecting the Store.

Features can also be added to the Store programmatically using the `addFeatures` method:

```javascript
// Add a Point to the Store
draw.addFeatures([
  {
    type: "Feature",
    geometry: {
      type: "Point",
      coordinates: [-1.825859, 51.178867],
    },
    properties: {
      mode: "point",
    },
  },
]);
```

If you want to get an ID for a feature and create that outside Terra Draw to do something with it later, you can use the `getFeatureId` method on the Terra Draw instance, like so:

```javascript

const id = draw.getFeatureId()

// Add a Point to the Store
draw.addFeatures([
  {
    id,
    type: "Feature",
    geometry: {
      type: "Point",
      coordinates: [-1.825859, 51.178867],
    },
    properties: {
      mode: "point",
    },
  },
]);
```

Here setting the mode property will add the feature to that specific mode, so for example in this instance we added a point to the `TerraDrawPointMode` of this instance of Terra Draw. 

> [!IMPORTANT]
> In the above example we do not pass in an id property, as addFeatures will generate one for us using the `idStrategy` provided or the built in one, which defaults to UUID4. You can provide your own id but it must be valid by the `idStrategy` you provide. For more info on ids, see the [Ids section](./2.STORE.md#ids) above.

You can add the `mode` property to the Feature dynamically before adding it to Terra Draw:

```javascript
// Iterate over the points
points.forEach((point) => {
  // Set the `mode` property to "point"
  point.properties.mode = "point";
});

draw.addFeatures(points);
```

> [!NOTE]
> We have to provide the mode property to the passed feature because otherwise Terra Draw does not know which mode you intended the feature to be added to. Assume a user has two different types of point modes in their application - where would the point be added to? Although it is slightly more verbose, this approach ensures that the features end up in the correct modes they were intended for by the user.


We can also get data at a specific event location, using the `getFeaturesAtLngLat` and `getFeaturesAtPointerEvent` methods. Find out more about these in the [events section of the guides](./6.EVENTS.md).

### Removing Data

To remove Features from the Store use the `removeFeatures` or `clear` methods:

```javascript
// Remove Feature from the Store by ID
draw.removeFeatures(["id-1", "id-2", "id-3"]);

// Remove all Features from the Store
draw.clear();
```

See the `TerraDraw` [API Docs](https://jameslmilner.github.io/terra-draw/classes/TerraDraw.html) for more information.

## Restoring Data 

Terra Draw is agnostic to how you want to presist the data created with it. You can store data in a remote database, in [IndexedDB](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/IndexedDB_API), [localStorage](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/localStorage), or any other storage mechanism you so wish. As a simple example of storing the data in `localStorage`, you could take a snapshot and restore it a later date like so:

```javascript
const features = draw.getSnapshot()

// We don't want any mid points or selection points so we filter them out
const filteredFeatures = features.filter((f) => !f.properties.midPoint && !f.properties.selectionPoint)

// localStorage can only store strings, so we strinify the features first
localStorage.setItem('terra-draw-data', JSON.stringify(filteredFeatures));

// Later on, perhaps after the user has refreshed.
const retrievedFeatures = localStorage.getItem('terra-draw-data');
if (retrievedFeatures) {
  draw.addFeatures(JSON.parse(retrievedFeatures))
}
```

**Guides**

1. [x] [Getting Started](./1.GETTING_STARTED.md)
2. [x] Store 
3. [ ] [Adapters](./3.ADAPTERS.md)
4. [ ] [Modes](./4.MODES.md)
5. [ ] [Styling](./5.STYLING.md)
6. [ ] [Events](./6.EVENTS.md)
7. [ ] [Development](./7.DEVELOPMENT.md)
